DESIGN.md, before:

# Calico DB Design

## Terms
+ **block**: The basic unit of storage in the `wal` file (see **page**).
+ **cell**: An structure embedded within a **node** that contains a **key** and optionally a **value**.
  **Cells** can be either internal cells or external cells, depending on what type of node they belong to.
+ **cell directory**: An embedded array that is placed right after the node header.
  Maps **cell indexes** to **cell pointers**, and is kept sorted by the **keys**.
+ **cell index**: The index of a cell in the cell directory.
+ **cell pointer**: A 16-bit unsigned integer that describes the offset of a cell from the start of a node page.
+ **key**: A sequence of bytes that uniquely identify a record in the database.
  **Keys** are compared as if they are made up of unsigned bytes.
+ **link**: A page that contains a pointer to another page and optionally some data.
+ **node**: A page that contains cells and is involved in the B<sup>+</sup>-tree structure.
+ **overflow chain**: A linked list composed of link pages.
  Used to keep track of one or more pages, or part of a **value** that cannot fit in a **node**.
+ **page**: The basic unit of storage in the `data` file; every access attempts to read or write an entire page of data.
+ **page ID**: A 32-bit unsigned integer that uniquely identifies a page in the `data` file.
  **Page IDs** start at 1 and increase sequentially, with 0 being reserved for `NULL`.
+ **page pointer**: Synonym for **page ID**.
+ **value**: A sequence of bytes associated with a unique **key** to form a database record.

## B<sup>+</sup>-Tree
Calico DB uses a B<sup>+</sup>-tree to maintain an ordered collection of records.
The tree is contained in the `data` file and is made up of two types of nodes: internal and external.
Nodes that have children are internal nodes, while those that do not are external nodes.
External nodes make up the lowest level of the B<sup>+</sup>-tree and are connected as a doubly-linked list.

### Database Header
The database header is located at the start of the `data` file.
It contains important database state information and is affected by many components.

| Size | Offset | Name         | Description                                                                 |
|-----:|-------:|:-------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | Magic code   | An integer constant that identifies the `data` file as a Calico DB database |
|    4 |      4 | Header CRC   | CRC computed on this header                                                 |
|    4 |      8 | Page count   | Number of pages allocated to the database                                   |
|    4 |     12 | Node count   | Number of node pages allocated to the database                              |
|    4 |     16 | Free count   | Number of pages in the free list                                            |                                           
|    4 |     20 | Free start   | Page ID of the first free list page                                         |
|    2 |     24 | Page size    | Size of a database page in bytes                                            |
|    2 |     26 | Block size   | Size of a WAL block in bytes                                                |
|    4 |     28 | Record count | Number of records in the database                                           |
|    4 |     32 | Flushed LSN  | LSN of the last WAL record flushed to disk after a successful commit        |
|   12 |     36 | Reserved     | Reserved for expansion                                                      |

### Pages
The page size is chosen at the time the database is created and must be a power of two.
All pages begin with a page header, except for the root page, which places the database header first.
Following the page header are the page contents, which depend on the page type.
Pages can be one of two general types, links or nodes, depending on the value of the `Type` field.
See [Links](#links) and [Nodes](#nodes) for more details.
If the database instance was created with transactions enabled, pages will keep track of their contents before and after all modifications.
This is accomplished by copying the "before" page contents to scratch memory once, then updating the page in-place.
The offset and size of each write are kept track of, and a simple algorithm is used to keep them consolidated.
When the page is no longer needed, the updates are sent to the WAL.

#### Page Header
|  Size | Offset | Name    | Description                                                        |
|------:|-------:|:--------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     4 |      0 | LSN     | LSN of the WAL record describing the last modification to the page |
|     2 |      4 | Type    | Page type field                                                    |

### Links
A link is a page that holds a single pointer to another page.
They are used to form the freelist, and to connect overflow chains.

#### Link Header
| Size | Offset | Name    | Description                           |
|-----:|-------:|:--------|:--------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | Next ID | Page ID of the next page in the chain |

## Buffer Pool
TODO

### Frames
TODO

### Pager
TODO

### Page Cache
TODO

## Filesystem Interface
TODO

### Directories
TODO

### Files
Currently, the `data`, `log`, and `wal` files are maintained in the toplevel directory.
The `data` file contains the data records embedded in a B<sup>+</sup>-tree.
The `log` file contains the log output of the database instance, written by `spdlog`.
The `wal` file contains the write-ahead log.

### Nodes
Nodes are pages that participate in forming the B<sup>+</sup>-tree structure.
Each node contains many cells and is responsible for their local ordering as well as maintaining links to neighboring nodes.
Nodes are made up of three main regions: the header, the cell pointer list, and the cell content area.

#### Node Header
The node header contains information about the node's layout and its connections to surrounding nodes.

| Size | Offset | Name                           | Description                                      |
|-----:|-------:|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | Header CRC                     | CRC computed on this header                      |
|    4 |      4 | Parent ID                      | Page ID of the parent node                       |
|    4 |      8 | Rightmost child ID<sup>1</sup> | Page ID of the rightmost child node              |
|    4 |      8 | Right sibling ID<sup>1</sup>   | Page ID of the right sibling node                |
|    4 |     12 | Left sibling ID<sup>2</sup>    | Page ID of the left sibling node                 |
|    2 |     14 | Cell count                     | Number of cells in the node                      |
|    2 |     16 | Free block count               | Number of free blocks in the node                |
|    2 |     18 | Cell start                     | Offset of the end of the "gap" area              |
|    2 |     20 | Free block start               | Offset of the first entry in the free block list |
|    2 |     22 | Fragment count                 | Number of fragmented bytes                       |

<sup>1</sup> The rightmost child ID and right sibling ID fields refer to the same data location.
Use the rightmost child ID name in internal nodes and the right sibling ID name in external nodes.
<sup>2</sup> The left sibling ID, like the right sibling ID, is only present in external nodes.
This field is currently unused in internal nodes.

[//]: # (TODO: We could probably do away with the free block count field and just use a "null-terminator" in the
               last free block. We may also be able to use a byte for the fragment count and defragment if it is
               about to overflow. It generally doesn't get that large anyway, it's just a measure to make sure we
               keep track of every byte on the page.)

#### Cell Directory
The cell directory is an embedded array located directly after the node header.
It stores the offset of each cell from the start of the node, ordered by the keys, which are stored with their respective cells further down in the cell content area.
We can use binary search on the cell directory to retrieve the location of a cell in $O(log_2 N)$, where $N$ is the number of cells in the node.

#### Cell Content Area
The cell content area makes up the majority of the page, and is located right after the cell directory.
As cells are added, the cell directory grows toward the end of the page.
The cells themselves are added to the cell content area from the reverse direction, such that the two regions meet in the middle.
When a cell is removed, its memory is added to a list of free blocks embedded within the node.
The number of free blocks and the location of the first free block are kept in the node header (`Free count` and `Free start`, respectively).
When a new cell is added, the free block list is traversed to see if there is a free block large enough to satisfy the request.
If so, the new cell is allocated from the free block. 
Otherwise, the cell is allocated from the gap region between the cell directory and the existing cell content.
As cells are added and removed, we may encounter a situation where the memory we need to write a new cell exists on the page, but is not contiguous.
Such a page requires defragmentation, where all free blocks and fragments are merged into the gap space.

### Cell Layout
| Size |     Offset | Name                      | Description                                     |
|-----:|-----------:|:--------------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
|    4 |          0 | Left child ID<sup>1</sup> | Page ID of the left child node                  |
|    2 |          4 | Key size (K)              | Size of the key in bytes                        |
|    4 |          6 | Value size (V)            | Size of the value in bytes                      |
|    K |         10 | Key                       | Key by which cells are ordered                  |
|    L |     10 + K | Local value<sup>2</sup>   | Some or all of the record value                 |
|    4 | 10 + K + L | Overflow ID<sup>3</sup>   | Page ID of the first page in the overflow chain |

<sup>1</sup> This field is only present in internal cells. <br>
<sup>2</sup> `Local value` (length = `L`) refers to the portion of the value stored directly in the node.
`L` depends on the combined size of the key and value and may or may not be equal to `V`. <br>
<sup>3</sup> This field is only present if the value is too large to fit in the node, i.e. $L < V$.
See [Overflow Chains](#overflow-chains) for details.

## Free List
Occasionally, a routine will require deletion of a page.
The free list keeps track of these pages in a singly-linked list of free list link pages.
Each time we need to delete a page, we convert it to a link page and add it at the head of the list, which is stored in the database header.

## Overflow Chains
Currently, Calico DB allows insertion of arbitrary values, but places a limit on the key size.
If a record is too large, the excess portion of the value is copied to one or more overflow pages.
The cell made from this record will then store the first page ID in the overflow chain in its `Overflow ID` header field.
Note that no part of the key is ever transferred to an overflow page: every key must be entirely embedded in the node that it belongs to.
This makes traversing the B<sup>+</sup>-tree easier (we don't have to read additional pages to find keys) and doesn't mess up the page cache.

[//]: # (TODO: Now that we're using a simplified 2Q page cache, the cache won't get messed up unless we read the page 
               again while it is in the FIFO queue. We should be able to have arbitrary length keys, potentially spanning
               multiple overflow pages, without affecting the cache too much.)

## Write-Ahead Log (WAL)
Currently, the WAL consists of a single file, written in block-sized chunks.
It is managed by a pair of constructs: one to read from the file and one to write to it.
Both constructs operate on WAL records and perform their own caching internally.

### WAL Writer
The WAL writer fills up an internal buffer with WAL records.
When it runs out of space, it flushes the buffer to the WAL file.
At that point, all database pages with updates corresponding to the flushed records can be safely written to the `data` file.
To this end, we always keep the LSN of the most-recently-flushed record in memory.
Also note that the WAL is truncated after each commit, including when the database instance is closed.

### WAL Reader
The WAL reader is a cursor-like object used to traverse the `wal` file.
It can be used to traverse in either direction, but must always start at the beginning of the file.

### WAL Records
WAL records are used to store information about updates made to database pages.
See ***3*** for more information about WAL records.
We use a similar scheme including multiple record types.
Basically, multiple WAL records can correspond to a single page update.
This is because WAL records can be split up into multiple blocks, depending on their size and the amount of memory remaining in the WAL writer's internal buffer.

### WAL Record Header
| Size | Offset | Name         | Description                                       |
|-----:|-------:|:-------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | LSN          | Unique log sequence number describing this record |
|    4 |      4 | CRC          | CRC computed on this record                       |
|    1 |      8 | Type         | WAL record type                                   |
|    2 |      9 | Payload size | Size of the payload in bytes                      |

### WAL Record Payload Header
| Size | Offset | Name              | Description                                    |
|-----:|-------:|:------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | Previous LSN      | LSN describing the previous update to the page |
|    4 |      4 | Page ID           | Page ID of the page that was updated           |
|    2 |      6 | Count<sup>1</sup> | Number of payload entries                      |

<sup>1</sup> Determines the number of WAL record payload entries

### WAL Record Payload Entry
Holds a region of a database page before and after some modification.

| Size | Offset | Name     | Description                                     |
|-----:|-------:|:---------|:------------------------------------------------|
|    2 |      0 | Offset   | Offset of the update from the start of the page |
|    2 |      2 | Size (Y) | Size of the updated region in bytes             |
|    Y |      4 | Before   | Contents before the update                      |
|    Y |  4 + Y | After    | Contents after the update                       |

## Cursors
A cursor acts much like an STL iterator, allowing traversal of the database in-order.
Since we are using a B<sup>+</sup>-tree, all records are stored in external nodes.
Thus, cursors are confined to bottom row of the tree and move around using sibling node links.
A valid cursor is one that is positioned on an existing database record, while an invalid cursor is one that is not.
Invalid cursors make no distinction between "end" (one past the last element) and the "rend" (one before the first element) positions.
When a cursor moves out of range, it is marked invalid and cannot be restored.
This is achieved by letting the cursor stay on the first or last element, and setting a boolean flag to mark invalid-ness.
While this prohibits us from achieving an ordering between any two cursors, we can still use equality comparison (with the caveat that all invalid cursors compare the same).
This means that iterating toward an invalid cursor is equivalent to iterating to the end of the database.
For example, the following snippet will iterate through the whole database.
```C++
namespace cco = calico;

// Here we assume that the database is nonempty and does not contain "xyz", or anything that compares 
// greater than it.
const auto bounds = db.find(cco::stob("xyz"), true);
assert(not bounds.is_valid());

for (auto c = db.find_minimum(); c != bounds; c++) {
    // Do something with c.key() and/or c.value().
}
```

This is effectively the same as iterating while `c.is_valid()`.

## Transactions
Calico DB uses transactions to preserve database integrity.
Transactions are atomic, that is, the effects of a transaction are either completely applied, or entirely discarded.
This is achieved by storing both undo and redo information in the WAL, and always flushing WAL records before their corresponding data pages.
In the event of a crash, we can always read the WAL forward to regain lost updates, or backward to undo applied updates.

## Recovery
Each time the database is closed, we commit the running transaction, which involves truncating the WAL.
This means that the presence of records in the WAL on startup indicates that the previous database instance had crashed, meaning recovery is necessary.
In Calico DB, recovery is pretty simple.
First, we read the WAL starting from the beginning, applying updates to stale pages.
If we encounter a commit record at the end of the WAL, then recovery is complete.
Otherwise, we do not have enough information to complete the transaction and must abort.
Here we read the WAL in reverse, reverting pages to their state before the transaction started.
In either case, we truncate the WAL and flush the buffer pool on completion.

[//]: # (TODO: Since we are currently using exceptions, we need to make sure that commit\(\), abort\(\), and
               the recovery procedure are all reentrant. They should be already, more or less, but we need
               explicit verification of this fact. If the recovery procedure throws, we will end up aborting
               the database constructor, but we should be able to try to construct that database instance as
               many times as we want until it maybe succeeds, and not have it become corrupted.)

## References
1. https://cstack.github.io/db_tutorial/
  + Awesome tutorial on database development in C
2. https://www.sqlite.org/arch.html
  + Much of this project was inspired by SQLite3, both the architecture design documents and the source code
  + Especially see the B-tree design document, as well as `btree.h`, `btree.c`, and `btreeInt.h`
2. https://github.com/google/leveldb
  + The idea for using a hand-rolled slice object and some of its functionality are from `slice.h`.
  + Their CMake build process was very instructive.
3. https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/Write-Ahead-Log
  + Nice explanation of RocksDB's WAL
  + The idea to have multiple different record types and to use a "tail" buffer are from this document
4. https://arpitbhayani.me/blogs/2q-cache
  + Nice description of the 2Q cache replacement policy

Commit message:

Shortened the library namespace from "calico" to "cco", among other cosmetic changes.

DESIGN.md, after:

# Calico DB Design

## Terms
+ **block**: The basic unit of storage in the `wal` file (see **page**).
+ **cell**: An structure embedded within a **node** that contains a **key** and optionally a **value**.
  **Cells** can be either internal cells or external cells, depending on what type of node they belong to.
+ **cell directory**: An embedded array that is placed right after the node header.
  Maps **cell indexes** to **cell pointers**, and is kept sorted by the **keys**.
+ **cell index**: The index of a cell in the cell directory.
+ **cell pointer**: A 16-bit unsigned integer that describes the offset of a cell from the start of a node page.
+ **key**: A sequence of bytes that uniquely identify a record in the database.
  **Keys** are compared as if they are made up of unsigned bytes.
+ **link**: A page that contains a pointer to another page and optionally some data.
+ **node**: A page that contains cells and is involved in the B<sup>+</sup>-tree structure.
+ **overflow chain**: A linked list composed of link pages.
  Used to keep track of one or more pages, or part of a **value** that cannot fit in a **node**.
+ **page**: The basic unit of storage in the `data` file; every access attempts to read or write an entire page of data.
+ **page ID**: A 32-bit unsigned integer that uniquely identifies a page in the `data` file.
  **Page IDs** start at 1 and increase sequentially, with 0 being reserved for `NULL`.
+ **page pointer**: Synonym for **page ID**.
+ **value**: A sequence of bytes associated with a unique **key** to form a database record.

## Error Handling
**Note**: `std::make_unique<T>()` is used to allocate some database components that use runtime polymorphism (for test doubles).
In these places, OOM exceptions are allowed to escape and, if uncaught by the user, terminate the program.
My thought is that if we do not have enough memory to allocate a relatively small object, we probably don't have enough memory to do anything useful, so it's okay to do nothing.

TODO: Use something like `std::unique_ptr<T> {new(std::nothrow) T}` and try to log the OOM error (there isn't a nothrow overload of `std::make_unique<T>()`).
For example, to allocate a new `Directory` we could use something like:

```C++
auto directory = std::unique_ptr<IDirectory> {new(std::nothrow) Directory {"/home/calico/cats"}};
```

## B<sup>+</sup>-Tree
Calico DB uses a B<sup>+</sup>-tree to maintain an ordered collection of records.
The tree is contained in the `data` file and is made up of two types of nodes: internal and external.
Nodes that have children are internal nodes, while those that do not are external nodes.
External nodes make up the lowest level of the B<sup>+</sup>-tree and are connected as a doubly-linked list.

### Database Header
The database header is located at the start of the `data` file.
It contains important database state information and is affected by many components.

| Size | Offset | Name         | Description                                                                 |
|-----:|-------:|:-------------|:----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | Magic code   | An integer constant that identifies the `data` file as a Calico DB database |
|    4 |      4 | Header CRC   | CRC computed on this header                                                 |
|    4 |      8 | Page count   | Number of pages allocated to the database                                   |
|    4 |     12 | Node count   | Number of node pages allocated to the database                              |
|    4 |     16 | Free count   | Number of pages in the free list                                            |                                           
|    4 |     20 | Free start   | Page ID of the first free list page                                         |
|    2 |     24 | Page size    | Size of a database page in bytes                                            |
|    2 |     26 | Block size   | Size of a WAL block in bytes                                                |
|    4 |     28 | Record count | Number of records in the database                                           |
|    4 |     32 | Flushed LSN  | LSN of the last WAL record flushed to disk after a successful commit        |
|   12 |     36 | Reserved     | Reserved for expansion                                                      |

### Pages
The page size is chosen at the time the database is created and must be a power of two.
All pages begin with a page header, except for the root page, which places the database header first.
Following the page header are the page contents, which depend on the page type.
Pages can be one of two general types, links or nodes, depending on the value of the `Type` field.
See [Links](#links) and [Nodes](#nodes) for more details.
If the database instance was created with transactions enabled, pages will keep track of their contents before and after all modifications.
This is accomplished by copying the "before" page contents to scratch memory once, then updating the page in-place.
The offset and size of each write are kept track of, and a simple algorithm is used to keep them consolidated.
When the page is no longer needed, the updates are sent to the WAL.

#### Page Header
|  Size | Offset | Name    | Description                                                        |
|------:|-------:|:--------|:-------------------------------------------------------------------|
|     4 |      0 | LSN     | LSN of the WAL record describing the last modification to the page |
|     2 |      4 | Type    | Page type field                                                    |

### Links
A link is a page that holds a single pointer to another page.
They are used to form the freelist, and to connect overflow chains.

#### Link Header
| Size | Offset | Name    | Description                           |
|-----:|-------:|:--------|:--------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | Next ID | Page ID of the next page in the chain |

## Buffer Pool
TODO

### Frames
TODO

### Pager
TODO

### Page Cache
TODO

## Filesystem Interface
TODO

### Directories
TODO

### Files
Currently, the `data`, `log`, and `wal` files are maintained in the toplevel directory.
The `data` file contains the data records embedded in a B<sup>+</sup>-tree.
The `log` file contains the log output of the database instance, written by `spdlog`.
The `wal` file contains the write-ahead log.

### Nodes
Nodes are pages that participate in forming the B<sup>+</sup>-tree structure.
Each node contains many cells and is responsible for their local ordering as well as maintaining links to neighboring nodes.
Nodes are made up of three main regions: the header, the cell pointer list, and the cell content area.

#### Node Header
The node header contains information about the node's layout and its connections to surrounding nodes.

| Size | Offset | Name                           | Description                                      |
|-----:|-------:|:-------------------------------|:-------------------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | Header CRC                     | CRC computed on this header                      |
|    4 |      4 | Parent ID                      | Page ID of the parent node                       |
|    4 |      8 | Rightmost child ID<sup>1</sup> | Page ID of the rightmost child node              |
|    4 |      8 | Right sibling ID<sup>1</sup>   | Page ID of the right sibling node                |
|    4 |     12 | Left sibling ID<sup>2</sup>    | Page ID of the left sibling node                 |
|    2 |     14 | Cell count                     | Number of cells in the node                      |
|    2 |     16 | Free block count               | Number of free blocks in the node                |
|    2 |     18 | Cell start                     | Offset of the end of the "gap" area              |
|    2 |     20 | Free block start               | Offset of the first entry in the free block list |
|    2 |     22 | Fragment count                 | Number of fragmented bytes                       |

<sup>1</sup> The rightmost child ID and right sibling ID fields refer to the same data location.
Use the rightmost child ID name in internal nodes and the right sibling ID name in external nodes.
<sup>2</sup> The left sibling ID, like the right sibling ID, is only present in external nodes.
This field is currently unused in internal nodes.

[//]: # (TODO: We could probably do away with the free block count field and just use a "null-terminator" in the
               last free block. We may also be able to use a byte for the fragment count and defragment if it is
               about to overflow. It generally doesn't get that large anyway, it's just a measure to make sure we
               keep track of every byte on the page.)

#### Cell Directory
The cell directory is an embedded array located directly after the node header.
It stores the offset of each cell from the start of the node, ordered by the keys, which are stored with their respective cells further down in the cell content area.
We can use binary search on the cell directory to retrieve the location of a cell in $O(log_2 N)$, where $N$ is the number of cells in the node.

#### Cell Content Area
The cell content area makes up the majority of the page, and is located right after the cell directory.
As cells are added, the cell directory grows toward the end of the page.
The cells themselves are added to the cell content area from the reverse direction, such that the two regions meet in the middle.
When a cell is removed, its memory is added to a list of free blocks embedded within the node.
The number of free blocks and the location of the first free block are kept in the node header (`Free count` and `Free start`, respectively).
When a new cell is added, the free block list is traversed to see if there is a free block large enough to satisfy the request.
If so, the new cell is allocated from the free block. 
Otherwise, the cell is allocated from the gap region between the cell directory and the existing cell content.
As cells are added and removed, we may encounter a situation where the memory we need to write a new cell exists on the page, but is not contiguous.
Such a page requires defragmentation, where all free blocks and fragments are merged into the gap space.

### Cell Layout
| Size |     Offset | Name                      | Description                                     |
|-----:|-----------:|:--------------------------|:------------------------------------------------|
|    4 |          0 | Left child ID<sup>1</sup> | Page ID of the left child node                  |
|    2 |          4 | Key size (K)              | Size of the key in bytes                        |
|    4 |          6 | Value size (V)            | Size of the value in bytes                      |
|    K |         10 | Key                       | Key by which cells are ordered                  |
|    L |     10 + K | Local value<sup>2</sup>   | Some or all of the record value                 |
|    4 | 10 + K + L | Overflow ID<sup>3</sup>   | Page ID of the first page in the overflow chain |

<sup>1</sup> This field is only present in internal cells. <br>
<sup>2</sup> `Local value` (length = `L`) refers to the portion of the value stored directly in the node.
`L` depends on the combined size of the key and value and may or may not be equal to `V`. <br>
<sup>3</sup> This field is only present if the value is too large to fit in the node, i.e. $L < V$.
See [Overflow Chains](#overflow-chains) for details.

## Free List
Occasionally, a routine will require deletion of a page.
The free list keeps track of these pages in a singly-linked list of free list link pages.
Each time we need to delete a page, we convert it to a link page and add it at the head of the list, which is stored in the database header.

## Overflow Chains
Currently, Calico DB allows insertion of arbitrary values, but places a limit on the key size.
If a record is too large, the excess portion of the value is copied to one or more overflow pages.
The cell made from this record will then store the first page ID in the overflow chain in its `Overflow ID` header field.
Note that no part of the key is ever transferred to an overflow page: every key must be entirely embedded in the node that it belongs to.
This makes traversing the B<sup>+</sup>-tree easier (we don't have to read additional pages to find keys) and doesn't mess up the page cache.

[//]: # (TODO: Now that we're using a simplified 2Q page cache, the cache won't get messed up unless we read the page 
               again while it is in the FIFO queue. We should be able to have arbitrary length keys, potentially spanning
               multiple overflow pages, without affecting the cache too much.)

## Write-Ahead Log (WAL)
Currently, the WAL consists of a single file, written in block-sized chunks.
It is managed by a pair of constructs: one to read from the file and one to write to it.
Both constructs operate on WAL records and perform their own caching internally.

### WAL Writer
The WAL writer fills up an internal buffer with WAL records.
When it runs out of space, it flushes the buffer to the WAL file.
At that point, all database pages with updates corresponding to the flushed records can be safely written to the `data` file.
To this end, we always keep the LSN of the most-recently-flushed record in memory.
Also note that the WAL is truncated after each commit, including when the database instance is closed.

### WAL Reader
The WAL reader is a cursor-like object used to traverse the `wal` file.
It can be used to traverse in either direction, but must always start at the beginning of the file.

### WAL Records
WAL records are used to store information about updates made to database pages.
See ***3*** for more information about WAL records.
We use a similar scheme including multiple record types.
Basically, multiple WAL records can correspond to a single page update.
This is because WAL records can be split up into multiple blocks, depending on their size and the amount of memory remaining in the WAL writer's internal buffer.

### WAL Record Header
| Size | Offset | Name         | Description                                       |
|-----:|-------:|:-------------|:--------------------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | LSN          | Unique log sequence number describing this record |
|    4 |      4 | CRC          | CRC computed on this record                       |
|    1 |      8 | Type         | WAL record type                                   |
|    2 |      9 | Payload size | Size of the payload in bytes                      |

### WAL Record Payload Header
| Size | Offset | Name              | Description                                    |
|-----:|-------:|:------------------|:-----------------------------------------------|
|    4 |      0 | Previous LSN      | LSN describing the previous update to the page |
|    4 |      4 | Page ID           | Page ID of the page that was updated           |
|    2 |      6 | Count<sup>1</sup> | Number of payload entries                      |

<sup>1</sup> Determines the number of WAL record payload entries

### WAL Record Payload Entry
Holds a region of a database page before and after some modification.

| Size | Offset | Name     | Description                                     |
|-----:|-------:|:---------|:------------------------------------------------|
|    2 |      0 | Offset   | Offset of the update from the start of the page |
|    2 |      2 | Size (Y) | Size of the updated region in bytes             |
|    Y |      4 | Before   | Contents before the update                      |
|    Y |  4 + Y | After    | Contents after the update                       |

## Cursors
A cursor acts much like an STL iterator, allowing traversal of the database in-order.
Since we are using a B<sup>+</sup>-tree, all records are stored in external nodes.
Thus, cursors are confined to bottom row of the tree and move around using sibling node links.
A valid cursor is one that is positioned on an existing database record, while an invalid cursor is one that is not.
Invalid cursors make no distinction between "end" (one past the last element) and the "rend" (one before the first element) positions.
When a cursor moves out of range, it is marked invalid and cannot be restored.
This is achieved by letting the cursor stay on the first or last element, and setting a boolean flag to mark invalid-ness.
While this prohibits us from achieving an ordering between any two cursors, we can still use equality comparison (with the caveat that all invalid cursors compare the same).
This means that iterating toward an invalid cursor is equivalent to iterating to the end of the database.
For example, the following snippet will iterate through the whole database.
```C++
namespace cco = calico;

// Here we assume that the database is nonempty and does not contain "xyz", or anything that compares 
// greater than it.
const auto bounds = db.find(cco::stob("xyz"), true);
assert(not bounds.is_valid());

for (auto c = db.find_minimum(); c != bounds; c++) {
    // Do something with c.key() and/or c.value().
}
```

This is effectively the same as iterating while `c.is_valid()`.

## Transactions
Calico DB uses transactions to preserve database integrity.
Transactions are atomic, that is, the effects of a transaction are either completely applied, or entirely discarded.
This is achieved by storing both undo and redo information in the WAL, and always flushing WAL records before their corresponding data pages.
In the event of a crash, we can always read the WAL forward to regain lost updates, or backward to undo applied updates.

## Recovery
Each time the database is closed, we commit the running transaction, which involves truncating the WAL.
This means that the presence of records in the WAL on startup indicates that the previous database instance had crashed, meaning recovery is necessary.
In Calico DB, recovery is pretty simple.
First, we read the WAL starting from the beginning, applying updates to stale pages.
If we encounter a commit record at the end of the WAL, then recovery is complete.
Otherwise, we do not have enough information to complete the transaction and must abort.
Here we read the WAL in reverse, reverting pages to their state before the transaction started.
In either case, we truncate the WAL and flush the buffer pool on completion.

[//]: # (TODO: Since we are currently using exceptions, we need to make sure that commit\(\), abort\(\), and
               the recovery procedure are all reentrant. They should be already, more or less, but we need
               explicit verification of this fact. If the recovery procedure throws, we will end up aborting
               the database constructor, but we should be able to try to construct that database instance as
               many times as we want until it maybe succeeds, and not have it become corrupted.)

## References
1. https://cstack.github.io/db_tutorial/
  + Awesome tutorial on database development in C
2. https://www.sqlite.org/arch.html
  + Much of this project was inspired by SQLite3, both the architecture design documents and the source code
  + Especially see the B-tree design document, as well as `btree.h`, `btree.c`, and `btreeInt.h`
2. https://github.com/google/leveldb
  + The idea for using a hand-rolled slice object and some of its functionality are from `slice.h`.
  + Their CMake build process was very instructive.
3. https://github.com/facebook/rocksdb/wiki/Write-Ahead-Log
  + Nice explanation of RocksDB's WAL
  + The idea to have multiple different record types and to use a "tail" buffer are from this document
4. https://arpitbhayani.me/blogs/2q-cache
  + Nice description of the 2Q cache replacement policy
